## Model Details
This section provides fundamental information about the model, helping stakeholders understand its context and key characteristics.

### Person or organization developing model:
Databricks, Inc. [Databricks](https://databricks.com/)

### Model date:
March and April 2023 (training data generation), April 12, 2023 (blog post about Dolly v2)

### Model version:
`dolly-v2-12b`. Dolly v2 is also available in these smaller models sizes:

* [dolly-v2-7b](https://huggingface.co/databricks/dolly-v2-7b), a 6.9 billion parameter based on `pythia-6.9b`
* [dolly-v2-3b](https://huggingface.co/databricks/dolly-v2-3b), a 2.8 billion parameter based on `pythia-2.8b`

### Model type:
`dolly-v2-12b` is a 12 billion parameter causal language model. It is derived from [EleutherAI's](https://www.eleuther.ai/) [Pythia-12b](https://huggingface.co/EleutherAI/pythia-12b).

### Training details:
`dolly-v2-12b` is an instruction-following large language model trained on the Databricks machine learning platform. It is fine-tuned on a [~15K record instruction corpus](https://github.com/databrickslabs/dolly/tree/master/data) generated by Databricks employees in capability domains from the InstructGPT paper, including brainstorming, classification, closed QA, generation, information extraction, open QA and summarization.

### Paper or other resource for more information:
Please refer to the [dolly GitHub repo](https://github.com/databrickslabs/dolly#getting-started-with-response-generation) for tips on running inference for various GPU configurations.
[dolly GitHub repo](https://github.com/databrickslabs/dolly/tree/master/data) for training data.
[instruct_pipeline.py](https://huggingface.co/databricks/dolly-v2-3b/blob/main/instruct_pipeline.py) for custom pipeline code.
[EleutherAI LLM Evaluation Harness](https://github.com/EleutherAI/lm-evaluation-harness) for benchmark evaluation on various models.
[Databricks blog](https://www.databricks.com/blog/2023/04/12/dolly-first-open-commercially-viable-instruction-tuned-llm)

### Citation details:
```
@online{DatabricksBlog2023DollyV2,
    author    = {Mike Conover and Matt Hayes and Ankit Mathur and Jianwei Xie and Jun Wan and Sam Shah and Ali Ghodsi and Patrick Wendell and Matei Zaharia and Reynold Xin},
    title     = {Free Dolly: Introducing the World's First Truly Open Instruction-Tuned LLM},
    year      = {2023},
    url       = {https://www.databricks.com/blog/2023/04/12/dolly-first-open-commercially-viable-instruction-tuned-llm},
    urldate   = {2023-06-30}
}
```

### License:
licensed for commercial use. Released under a permissive license (CC-BY-SA).

### Contact:
Not available.

---

## Intended Use
This section outlines the intended applications of the model.

### Primary intended uses:
`dolly-v2-12b` is an instruction-following large language model. It is designed for capability domains from the InstructGPT paper, including brainstorming, classification, closed QA, generation, information extraction, open QA and summarization.

### Primary intended users:
Broader community and organizations for commercial use.

### Out-of-scope uses:
`dolly-v2-12b` is not a state-of-the-art generative language model and is not designed to perform competitively with more modern model architectures or models subject to larger pretraining corpuses. It is not designed for syntactically complex prompts, programming problems, mathematical operations, factual correctness, dates and times, open-ended question answering, avoiding hallucination, enumerating lists of specific length, stylistic mimicry, or having a sense of humor. It also does not have some capabilities, such as well-formatted letter writing, present in the original model.

---

## How to Use
This section outlines how to use the model.

To use the model with the `transformers` library on a machine with GPUs, first make sure you have the `transformers` and `accelerate` libraries installed.
In a Databricks notebook you could run:

```python
%pip install "accelerate>=0.16.0,<1" "transformers[torch]>=4.28.1,<5" "torch>=1.13.1,<2"
```

The instruction following pipeline can be loaded using the `pipeline` function as shown below.  This loads a custom `InstructionTextGenerationPipeline`
found in the model repo [here](https://huggingface.co/databricks/dolly-v2-3b/blob/main/instruct_pipeline.py), which is why `trust_remote_code=True` is required.
Including `torch_dtype=torch.bfloat16` is generally recommended if this type is supported in order to reduce memory usage.  It does not appear to impact output quality.
It is also fine to remove it if there is sufficient memory.

```python
import torch
from transformers import pipeline

generate_text = pipeline(model="databricks/dolly-v2-12b", torch_dtype=torch.bfloat16, trust_remote_code=True, device_map="auto")
```

You can then use the pipeline to answer instructions:

```python
res = generate_text("Explain to me the difference between nuclear fission and fusion.")
print(res[0]["generated_text"])
```

Alternatively, if you prefer to not use `trust_remote_code=True` you can download [instruct_pipeline.py](https://huggingface.co/databricks/dolly-v2-3b/blob/main/instruct_pipeline.py),
store it alongside your notebook, and construct the pipeline yourself from the loaded model and tokenizer:

```python
import torch
from instruct_pipeline import InstructionTextGenerationPipeline
from transformers import AutoModelForCausalLM, AutoTokenizer

tokenizer = AutoTokenizer.from_pretrained("databricks/dolly-v2-12b", padding_side="left")
model = AutoModelForCausalLM.from_pretrained("databricks/dolly-v2-12b", device_map="auto", torch_dtype=torch.bfloat16)

generate_text = InstructionTextGenerationPipeline(model=model, tokenizer=tokenizer)
```

### LangChain Usage

To use the pipeline with LangChain, you must set `return_full_text=True`, as LangChain expects the full text to be returned
and the default for the pipeline is to only return the new text.

```python
import torch
from transformers import pipeline

generate_text = pipeline(model="databricks/dolly-v2-12b", torch_dtype=torch.bfloat16,
                         trust_remote_code=True, device_map="auto", return_full_text=True)
```

You can create a prompt that either has only an instruction or has an instruction with context:

```python
from langchain import PromptTemplate, LLMChain
from langchain.llms import HuggingFacePipeline

# template for an instrution with no input
prompt = PromptTemplate(
    input_variables=["instruction"],
    template="{instruction}")

# template for an instruction with input
prompt_with_context = PromptTemplate(
    input_variables=["instruction", "context"],
    template="{instruction}\n\nInput:\n{context}")

hf_pipeline = HuggingFacePipeline(pipeline=generate_text)

llm_chain = LLMChain(llm=hf_pipeline, prompt=prompt)
llm_context_chain = LLMChain(llm=hf_pipeline, prompt=prompt_with_context)
```

Example predicting using a simple instruction:

```python
print(llm_chain.predict(instruction="Explain to me the difference between nuclear fission and fusion.").lstrip())
```

Example predicting using an instruction with context:

```python
context = """George Washington (February 22, 1732[b] - December 14, 1799) was an American military officer, statesman,
and Founding Father who served as the first president of the United States from 1789 to 1797."""

print(llm_context_chain.predict(instruction="When was George Washington president?", context=context).lstrip())
```

---

## Factors
This section addresses variables that may impact the model's performance.

### Relevant factors:
Like all language models, `dolly-v2-12b` reflects the content and limitations of its training corpuses.
- **The Pile**: GPT-J's pre-training corpus contains content mostly collected from the public internet, and like most web-scale datasets, it contains content many users would find objectionable. As such, the model is likely to reflect these shortcomings, potentially overtly in the case it is explicitly asked to produce objectionable content, and sometimes subtly, as in the case of biased or harmful implicit associations.
- **`databricks-dolly-15k`**: The training data on which `dolly-v2-12b` is instruction tuned represents natural language instructions generated by Databricks employees during a period spanning March and April 2023 and includes passages from Wikipedia as references passages for instruction categories like closed QA and summarization. The dataset may also reflect biases found in Wikipedia. Finally, the dataset likely reflects the interests and semantic choices of Databricks employees, a demographic which is not representative of the global population at large.

### Evaluation factors:
Benchmark performance on the [EleutherAI LLM Evaluation Harness](https://github.com/EleutherAI/lm-evaluation-harness).

---

## Metrics
This section describes how the model's performance is evaluated.

### Model performance measures:
Geometric mean, openbookqa, arc_easy, winogrande, hellaswag, arc_challenge, piqa, boolq.

### Decision thresholds:
Not available.

### Variation approaches:
Model results are sorted by geometric mean to produce an intelligible ordering in benchmark table.

---

## Evaluation Data
This section provides details about the datasets used to evaluate the model.

### Datasets:
[EleutherAI LLM Evaluation Harness](https://github.com/EleutherAI/lm-evaluation-harness) datasets: openbookqa, arc_easy, winogrande, hellaswag, arc_challenge, piqa, boolq.

### Motivation:
To benchmark model performance and compare with other models.

### Preprocessing:
Not available.

---

## Training Data
This section provides details about the datasets used to train the model.

### Datasets:
[~15K instruction/response fine-tuning corpus](https://github.com/databrickslabs/dolly/tree/master/data) (`databricks-dolly-15k`) generated by Databricks employees.
GPT-J's pre-training corpus (The Pile).

### Motivation:
`databricks-dolly-15k` for instruction tuning.

### Preprocessing:
Not available.

---

## Quantitative Analyses
This section presents disaggregated evaluation results.

### Unitary results:
|  model                            |   openbookqa |   arc_easy |   winogrande |   hellaswag |   arc_challenge |     piqa |    boolq |    gmean |
| --------------------------------- | ------------ | ---------- | ------------ | ----------- | --------------- | -------- | -------- | ---------|
| EleutherAI/pythia-2.8b            |        0.348 |   0.585859 |     0.589582 |    0.591217 |        0.323379 | 0.73395  | 0.638226 | 0.523431 |
| EleutherAI/pythia-6.9b            |        0.368 |   0.604798 |     0.608524 |    0.631548 |        0.343857 | 0.761153 | 0.6263   | 0.543567 |
| databricks/dolly-v2-3b            |        0.384 |   0.611532 |     0.589582 |    0.650767 |        0.370307 | 0.742655 | 0.575535 | 0.544886 |
| EleutherAI/pythia-12b             |        0.364 |   0.627104 |     0.636148 |    0.668094 |        0.346416 | 0.760065 | 0.673394 | 0.559676 |
| EleutherAI/gpt-j-6B               |        0.382 |   0.621633 |     0.651144 |    0.662617 |        0.363481 | 0.761153 | 0.655963 | 0.565936 |
| databricks/dolly-v2-12b           |        0.408 |   0.63931  |     0.616417 |    0.707927 |        0.388225 | 0.757889 | 0.568196 | 0.56781  |
| databricks/dolly-v2-7b            |        0.392 |   0.633838 |     0.607735 |    0.686517 |        0.406997 | 0.750816 | 0.644037 | 0.573487 |
| databricks/dolly-v1-6b            |        0.41  |   0.62963  |     0.643252 |    0.676758 |        0.384812 | 0.773667 | 0.687768 | 0.583431 |
| EleutherAI/gpt-neox-20b           |        0.402 |   0.683923 |     0.656669 |    0.7142   |        0.408703 | 0.784004 | 0.695413 | 0.602236 |

### Intersectional results:
Not available.

---

## Memory or Hardware Requirements
This section outlines the memory or hardware requirements for loading, deploying, and training the model.

### Loading Requirements:
Tips on running inference for various GPU configurations are available in the [dolly GitHub repo](https://github.com/databrickslabs/dolly#getting-started-with-response-generation).  Using `torch_dtype=torch.bfloat16` is recommended to reduce memory usage.

### Deploying Requirements:
Not available.

### Training or Fine-tuning Requirements:
Not available.

---

## Ethical Considerations
This section discusses the ethical considerations in model development, including challenges, risks, and solutions.

`dolly-v2-12b` reflects the content and limitations of its training corpuses.
The Pile, GPT-J's pre-training corpus, contains content mostly collected from the public internet, which contains content many users would find objectionable and may lead to biased or harmful implicit associations.
`databricks-dolly-15k` may contain typos and factual errors and may reflect biases found in Wikipedia and the interests and semantic choices of Databricks employees, a demographic which is not representative of the global population at large.
Databricks is committed to ongoing research and development efforts to develop helpful, honest and harmless AI technologies that maximize the potential of all individuals and organizations.

---

## Caveats and Recommendations
This section lists unresolved issues and provides guidance for users.

### Caveats:
`dolly-v2-12b` is not a state-of-the-art generative language model and has known limitations, including struggling with: syntactically complex prompts, programming problems, mathematical operations, factual errors, dates and times, open-ended question answering, hallucination, enumerating lists of specific length, stylistic mimicry, having a sense of humor, etc.
Moreover, `dolly-v2-12b` does not have some capabilities, such as well-formatted letter writing, present in the original model.
The Dolly model family is under active development, and so any list of shortcomings is unlikely to be exhaustive.

### Recommendations:
Databricks is committed to ongoing research and development efforts to develop helpful, honest and harmless AI technologies.

---

## Additional Information
`dolly-v2-12b` is not a state-of-the-art model, but does exhibit surprisingly high quality instruction following behavior not characteristic of the foundation model on which it is based.
Quantitative benchmarking is ongoing.
To our knowledge `databricks-dolly-15k` does not contain obscenity, intellectual property, or personally identifying information about non-public figures.
`dolly-v2-12b` underperforms `dolly-v1-6b` in some evaluation benchmarks. We believe this owes to the composition and size of the underlying fine tuning datasets, 
but a robust statement as to the sources of these variations requires further study.  
Happy Hacking!