## Model Details
This section provides fundamental information about the model, helping stakeholders understand its context and key characteristics.

### Person or organization developing model:
Meta developed and publicly released the Llama 2 family of large language models (LLMs).

**Model Developers** Meta

### Model date:
Llama 2 was trained between January 2023 and July 2023.

### Model version:
Llama 2 is a collection of pretrained and fine-tuned generative text models ranging in scale from 7 billion to 70 billion parameters. This is the repository for the 7B fine-tuned model, optimized for dialogue use cases and converted for the Hugging Face Transformers format.

Llama 2 comes in a range of parameter sizes — 7B, 13B, and 70B — as well as pretrained and fine-tuned variations.

### Model type:
Llama 2 is an auto-regressive language model that uses an optimized transformer architecture. The models range in scale from 7 billion to 70 billion parameters and support a context length of 4k tokens.

### Training details:
The tuned versions use supervised fine-tuning (SFT) and reinforcement learning with human feedback (RLHF) to align to human preferences for helpfulness and safety.

Training Data|Params|Content Length|GQA|Tokens|LR
---|---|---|---|---|---
*A new mix of publicly available online data*|7B|4k|&#10007;|2.0T|3.0 x 10<sup>-4</sup>
*A new mix of publicly available online data*|13B|4k|&#10007;|2.0T|3.0 x 10<sup>-4</sup>
*A new mix of publicly available online data*|70B|4k|&#10004;|2.0T|1.5 x 10<sup>-4</sup>

All models are trained with a global batch-size of 4M tokens. Bigger models -  70B -- use Grouped-Query Attention (GQA) for improved inference scalability.

We used custom training libraries, Meta's Research Super Cluster, and production clusters for pretraining. Fine-tuning, annotation, and evaluation were also performed on third-party cloud compute.

### Paper or other resource for more information:
[website](https://ai.meta.com/resources/models-and-libraries/llama-downloads/)

reference code in github: [`chat_completion`](https://github.com/facebookresearch/llama/blob/main/llama/generation.py#L212).

Responsible Use Guide: [https://ai.meta.com/llama/responsible-use-guide/](https://ai.meta.com/llama/responsible-use-guide)

Reporting issues with the model: [github.com/facebookresearch/llama](http://github.com/facebookresearch/llama)

Reporting problematic content generated by the model: [developers.facebook.com/llama_output_feedback](http://developers.facebook.com/llama_output_feedback)

Reporting bugs and security concerns: [facebook.com/whitehat/info](http://facebook.com/whitehat/info)

Llama Model Index:

|Model|Llama2|Llama2-hf|Llama2-chat|Llama2-chat-hf|
|---|---|---|---|---|
|7B| [Link](https://huggingface.co/llamaste/Llama-2-7b) | [Link](https://huggingface.co/llamaste/Llama-2-7b-hf) | [Link](https://huggingface.co/llamaste/Llama-2-7b-chat) | [Link](https://huggingface.co/llamaste/Llama-2-7b-chat-hf)|
|13B| [Link](https://huggingface.co/llamaste/Llama-2-13b) | [Link](https://huggingface.co/llamaste/Llama-2-13b-hf) | [Link](https://huggingface.co/llamaste/Llama-2-13b-chat) | [Link](https://huggingface.co/llamaste/Llama-2-13b-hf)|
|70B| [Link](https://huggingface.co/llamaste/Llama-2-70b) | [Link](https://huggingface.co/llamaste/Llama-2-70b-hf) | [Link](https://huggingface.co/llamaste/Llama-2-70b-chat) | [Link](https://huggingface.co/llamaste/Llama-2-70b-hf)|

### Citation details:
Not available.

### License:
Use of this model is governed by the Meta license. In order to download the model weights and tokenizer, please visit the [website](https://ai.meta.com/resources/models-and-libraries/llama-downloads/) and accept our License before requesting access here. A custom commercial license is available at: [https://ai.meta.com/resources/models-and-libraries/llama-downloads/](https://ai.meta.com/resources/models-and-libraries/llama-downloads/) Use in any other way that is prohibited by the Acceptable Use Policy and Licensing Agreement for Llama 2.

### Contact:
Not available.

---

## Intended Use
This section outlines the intended applications of the model.

### Primary intended uses:
Llama 2 is intended for commercial and research use in English. Tuned models are intended for assistant-like chat, whereas pretrained models can be adapted for a variety of natural language generation tasks. Models input text and generate text only.

To get the expected features and performance for the chat versions, a specific formatting needs to be followed, including the `INST` and `<<SYS>>` tags, `BOS` and `EOS` tokens, and the whitespaces and breaklines in between (we recommend calling `strip()` on inputs to avoid double-spaces). See our reference code in github for details: [`chat_completion`](https://github.com/facebookresearch/llama/blob/main/llama/generation.py#L212).

### Primary intended users:
Llama 2 is intended for commercial and research use. The primary intended users are developers for commercial and research applications.

### Out-of-scope uses:
Use in any manner that violates applicable laws or regulations (including trade compliance laws). Use in languages other than English. Use in any other way that is prohibited by the Acceptable Use Policy and Licensing Agreement for Llama 2.

---

## How to Use
This section outlines how to use the model.

To get the expected features and performance for the chat versions, a specific formatting needs to be followed, including the `INST` and `<<SYS>>` tags, `BOS` and `EOS` tokens, and the whitespaces and breaklines in between (we recommend calling `strip()` on inputs to avoid double-spaces). See our reference code in github for details: [`chat_completion`](https://github.com/facebookresearch/llama/blob/main/llama/generation.py#L212). Models input text only and generate text only.

---

## Factors
This section addresses variables that may impact the model's performance.

### Relevant factors:
Use in languages other than English may impact the model's performance. Llama 2’s potential outputs cannot be predicted in advance, and the model may in some instances produce inaccurate, biased or other objectionable responses to user prompts. Testing conducted to date has been in English, and has not covered all scenarios.

### Evaluation factors:
The model's performance is evaluated on standard academic benchmarks.

---

## Metrics
This section describes how the model's performance is evaluated.

### Model performance measures:
The model performance measures used are:

**Overall performance on grouped academic benchmarks:** Code, Commonsense Reasoning, World Knowledge, Reading Comprehension, Math, MMLU, BBH, AGI Eval.

**Evaluation of pretrained LLMs on automatic safety benchmarks:** TruthfulQA, Toxigen.

**Evaluation of fine-tuned LLMs on different safety datasets:** TruthfulQA, Toxigen.

### Decision thresholds:
Not available.

### Variation approaches:
For all evaluations, an internal evaluations library was used.

---

## Evaluation Data
This section provides details about the datasets used to evaluate the model.

### Datasets:
The model was evaluated on standard academic benchmarks, including: HumanEval, MBPP, PIQA, SIQA, HellaSwag, WinoGrande, ARC easy and challenge, OpenBookQA, CommonsenseQA, NaturalQuestions, TriviaQA, SQuAD, QuAC, BoolQ, TruthfulQA, and Toxigen.

### Motivation:
These datasets were used to report the results for the Llama 1 and Llama 2 models on standard academic benchmarks.

### Preprocessing:
For all the evaluations, an internal evaluations library was used.

---

## Training Data
This section provides details about the datasets used to train the model.

### Datasets:
Llama 2 was pretrained on 2 trillion tokens of data from publicly available sources. The fine-tuning data includes publicly available instruction datasets, as well as over one million new human-annotated examples. Neither the pretraining nor the fine-tuning datasets include Meta user data.

### Motivation:
Not available.

### Preprocessing:
Not available.

---

## Quantitative Analyses
This section presents disaggregated evaluation results.

### Unitary results:

**Overall performance on grouped academic benchmarks.**

|Model|Size|Code|Commonsense Reasoning|World Knowledge|Reading Comprehension|Math|MMLU|BBH|AGI Eval|
|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|
|Llama 1|7B|14.1|60.8|46.2|58.5|6.95|35.1|30.3|23.9|
|Llama 1|13B|18.9|66.1|52.6|62.3|10.9|46.9|37.0|33.9|
|Llama 1|33B|26.0|70.0|58.4|67.6|21.4|57.8|39.8|41.7|
|Llama 1|65B|30.7|70.7|60.5|68.6|30.8|63.4|43.5|47.6|
|Llama 2|7B|16.8|63.9|48.9|61.3|14.6|45.3|32.6|29.3|
|Llama 2|13B|24.5|66.9|55.4|65.8|28.7|54.8|39.4|39.1|
|Llama 2|70B|**37.5**|**71.9**|**63.6**|**69.4**|**35.2**|**68.9**|**51.2**|**54.2**|

**Evaluation of pretrained LLMs on automatic safety benchmarks.**

| | |TruthfulQA|Toxigen|
|---|---|---|---|
|Llama 1|7B|27.42|23.00|
|Llama 1|13B|41.74|23.08|
|Llama 1|33B|44.19|22.57|
|Llama 1|65B|48.71|21.77|
|Llama 2|7B|33.29|**21.25**|
|Llama 2|13B|41.86|26.10|
|Llama 2|70B|**50.18**|24.60|

**Evaluation of fine-tuned LLMs on different safety datasets.**

| | |TruthfulQA|Toxigen|
|---|---|---|---|
|Llama-2-Chat|7B|57.04|**0.00**|
|Llama-2-Chat|13B|62.18|**0.00**|
|Llama-2-Chat|70B|**64.14**|0.01|

### Intersectional results:
Not available.

---

## Memory or Hardware Requirements
This section outlines the memory or hardware requirements for loading, deploying, and training the model.

### Loading Requirements:
Not available.

### Deploying Requirements:
Not available.

### Training or Fine-tuning Requirements:
We used custom training libraries, Meta's Research Super Cluster, and production clusters for pretraining. Fine-tuning, annotation, and evaluation were also performed on third-party cloud compute.

Pretraining utilized a cumulative 3.3M GPU hours of computation on hardware of type A100-80GB (TDP of 350-400W).

| |Time (GPU hours)|Power Consumption (W)|Carbon Emitted(tCO<sub>2</sub>eq)|
|---|---|---|---|
|Llama 2 7B|184320|400|31.22|
|Llama 2 13B|368640|400|62.44|
|Llama 2 70B|1720320|400|291.42|
|Total|3311616||539.00|

---

## Ethical Considerations
This section discusses the ethical considerations in model development, including challenges, risks, and solutions.

Llama 2 is a new technology that carries risks with use. Testing conducted to date has been in English, and has not covered, nor could it cover all scenarios. For these reasons, as with all LLMs, Llama 2’s potential outputs cannot be predicted in advance, and the model may in some instances produce inaccurate, biased or other objectionable responses to user prompts. Therefore, before deploying any applications of Llama 2, developers should perform safety testing and tuning tailored to their specific applications of the model.

Please see the Responsible Use Guide available at [https://ai.meta.com/llama/responsible-use-guide/](https://ai.meta.com/llama/responsible-use-guide)

---

## Caveats and Recommendations
This section lists unresolved issues and provides guidance for users.

### Caveats:
Llama 2 is a new technology that carries risks with use. Testing conducted to date has been in English, and has not covered, nor could it cover all scenarios. For these reasons, as with all LLMs, Llama 2’s potential outputs cannot be predicted in advance, and the model may in some instances produce inaccurate, biased or other objectionable responses to user prompts.

### Recommendations:
Before deploying any applications of Llama 2, developers should perform safety testing and tuning tailored to their specific applications of the model. We recommend calling `strip()` on inputs to avoid double-spaces. Future versions of the tuned models will be released as we improve model safety with community feedback.

---

## Additional Information
Our fine-tuned LLMs, called Llama-2-Chat, are optimized for dialogue use cases. Llama-2-Chat models outperform open-source chat models on most benchmarks we tested, and in our human evaluations for helpfulness and safety, are on par with some popular closed-source models like ChatGPT and PaLM.

Token counts refer to pretraining data only.

**Status** This is a static model trained on an offline dataset.

**Data Freshness** The pretraining data has a cutoff of September 2022, but some tuning data is more recent, up to July 2023.

**Carbon Footprint** Estimated total emissions were 539 tCO2eq, 100% of which were offset by Meta’s sustainability program.

**Carbon Footprint CO<sub>2</sub> emissions during pretraining.** Time: total GPU time required for training each model. Power Consumption: peak power capacity per GPU device for the GPUs used adjusted for power usage efficiency. 100% of the emissions are directly offset by Meta's sustainability program, and because we are openly releasing these models, the pretraining costs do not need to be incurred by others.

**Overall performance on grouped academic benchmarks.** *Code:* We report the average pass@1 scores of our models on HumanEval and MBPP. *Commonsense Reasoning:* We report the average of PIQA, SIQA, HellaSwag, WinoGrande, ARC easy and challenge, OpenBookQA, and CommonsenseQA. We report 7-shot results for CommonSenseQA and 0-shot results for all other benchmarks. *World Knowledge:* We evaluate the 5-shot performance on NaturalQuestions and TriviaQA and report the average. *Reading Comprehension:* For reading comprehension, we report the 0-shot average on SQuAD, QuAC, and BoolQ. *MATH:* We report the average of the GSM8K (8 shot) and MATH (4 shot) benchmarks at top 1.

**Evaluation of pretrained LLMs on automatic safety benchmarks.** For TruthfulQA, we present the percentage of generations that are both truthful and informative (the higher the better). For ToxiGen, we present the percentage of toxic generations (the smaller the better).

**Evaluation of fine-tuned LLMs on different safety datasets.** Same metric definitions as above.